So a couple of years after I had graduated and had
left the laboratory, I decided to go back to Ohio
State for more extensive graduate work. And I got a
job back at the lab where I had worked before. And so
that was where I worked and completed my graduate
program then in the early 60s.
Then after I got the PhD from Ohio State,
determined that there wasn't really much of a
future there for me, largely because there were
young men on top of me, so to speak,
organizationally. And so I started looking
around, and
the department head There at Ohio State was an old
friend of Professor Al Kronk, who was at that time
the department head here. They had both been
together at Minnesota way back many years ago. And
so through my department head's good offices
there at Ohio State, I learned about the position
here at Texas A&M. I had interviewed a number of
other institutions, both public and private. But
I came to Texas A&M and liked what I saw. I
particularly liked the community because I
thought it was a good atmosphere in which to raise
my kids, and that was a very important matter to me.
And so we came to Texas A&M in the fall of 1964. Okay.
When did you complete your Ph.D. requirements?
When? In 64. At Ohio State. At Ohio State, right.
What was the topic of your dissertation? It had to
do with similarity parameters in hypersonic
flow. It has to do with chemically reacting flows
and reentry processes. Before we move on, let me
ask you a little more about your boyhood years.
What reminiscence do you have of the Depression?
Well,
fairly vivid actually. Although we were we
suffered very little in the Depression. My father
owned a bakery in a small town in Ohio, central
Ohio, a little town called Pleasantville, which
is, oh, I guess about 40 miles or so almost due east
of Columbus. And dad was a very successful baker,
and
he had a, you know, had a good business and a good
operation there. That is, our business Although
the bakery was located in Pleasantville,
he delivered bakery products to a lot of the other
small towns around there. And so during the
Depression, really we did quite well. My most
vivid recollection about it is of those people who
did not do well. I can remember he had brothers, and
of course my mother's family some of them did not do
well and i can remember our loading up baskets of of
groceries and of course bakery goods but meat and
fruit and stuff and and taking them to other
members of the family other you know other other
family units and i can remember
people coming to the bakery and asking for Well, if
they didn't have much money, well, they would buy
day-old bread and stale products, or partially
stale products. And I can remember, of course, a
lot of drifters, or tramps, as we called them then.
And I'm sure a lot of them good people. They would
come knock on the back door of my parents' house and
offer to do work in exchange for a meal. And I
remember lots of those.
But as far as my own family was concerned, of
course, I was an only child and typically a spoiled
brat. And so as far as the Depression touching me
personally, I was pretty high on the hog. But I can
sure remember others who were not. What did you
think of the New Deal program?
Well,
I guess at the time, it was probably the right thing
to do. Of course, there are those who maintain that
the country would have rebounded and prospered
regardless of how it would have been done, or
saying it another way, that it rebounded and
prospered either because of or in spite of
Franklin D. Roosevelt's program.
But it worked without a question. And the country,
of course, by the time the war began in 1939, that is
the war in Europe, not the war involving the US and
the Japanese.
The country actually had begun to rebound pretty
well, but it was really the war that finished the
recovery from the Depression. And so it's
difficult to really describe how much of that was
really produced by New Deal policies and how much
of it was not. But I know my grandfather, my
mother's father, worked on the WPA, the Works
Project Administration, which was an element of
the New Deal, which involved taking out-of-job,
out-of-work workers and placing them in task
forces which would do public works kinds of
things, build schools and hospitals and roads and
things like that. And
I know that helped my grandparents And my
grandfather, of course, he's a very proud man, and
he didn't like that too well because it had all the
trappings of a government handout, which in
effect it was, but it was really in exchange for
work, so it certainly was not like a welfare
program that does not involve work. But you have to
understand that in that area of Ohio, it's a
rock-ribbed conservative area, very
conservative. And so, I guess the prevailing view
was there that the country recovered really in
spite of the New Deal program and not because of it.
But I'm not sure. It's like so many of these things.
Certainly there were some good things that came
out of it and perhaps some things that were not so
good. Okay. Now let me, again I'm somewhat
confused. From 1951 through 64 you lived in the
Columbus area. No, we lived
most of that time in the Columbus area, but for a
time I was working at Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base, which is over at Dayton, which is like 50
miles away. That's when I was working for Air Force
Intelligence, and that was where I really got my
first taste of some of the types of work that we do
here at the center now. Well, in Air Force
antennas, was that, were you enlisted in the Air
Force when you were working there? No, I was
working as a civilian, and this, and I was not doing
any spying or anything like that, but at that time,
of course, the, well, it was clear at that time that
the Soviets were going to be major adversaries.
Winston Churchill had made his famous Iron
Curtain speech in, what, 47, I guess it was,
something like that. The Soviets were totally
intransigent about the situation in Eastern
Europe and about the United Nations. And of
course, Korea had begun the Korean War in July of
50, or June of 50, I guess it was. No, July of 50. And
so it was clear that we were we were in for some
difficulty there. So
the Air Force Technical Intelligence Center had
been set up at Wright Field. It
was an offshoot of elements of the old OSS that
functioned during World War II. And then
immediately following World War II, there had
been an outfit called Project Paperclip, I think
it was, which had been run by Colonel Hal Watson.
And Watson's charge in 1945 and 46 and 47 was to go
into Germany and to learn everything that we could
learn about advanced aeronautical developments
that they had going underway at the end of the war.
Of course, they had several advanced aircraft
like the Me 262 and the 163 and so forth that were
flying that were superior to anything that we had.
they had been deployed wrong and in insufficient
numbers really to affect the outcome of the war. If
they had come along earlier in the war and if Hitler
had used them right, it would have been a stickier
situation than it was. But in any event, Watson's
group was to do what I would call the first task of
technical intelligence. And of course we knew
that because of the way the political forces at the
time divvied up Germany, that the Soviets would
have access to a lot of that stuff too. And indeed
they do. They got, of course, they got a lot of the
rocket, the advanced German, the advanced rocket
work done by the Germans toward the tail end of the
war. And so I'm not really sure when the Air Force
Technical Intelligence Center was set up. I guess
it must have been around 48, something like that.
And so I arrived over there in 1951. And so my job, I
went into the guided missile group. And so my job
was to evaluate data from the Soviet Union about
their missile developments, rocket engine
development, things like that. And so I was there
until 1953.
And then went back to Ohio State for graduate work.
I
had
been involved in a dual degree program when I
entered Ohio State. And it was a combination of
engineering and mathematics degrees. That was a
program that led to two bachelor's degrees. And I
did that, I guess, perhaps It may have been that the
Depression had more of an effect on my thinking
than what I anticipated. Because in 1947, and of
course at that point I was like, what, two years
into my engineering undergraduate program. 47,
48 was not a good year for engineering graduates.
They were having trouble getting jobs. And
although I was totally consumed by aerospace
engineering, I really wondered if I was going to be
able to get a job. So at that point, I went into the
dual degree program to get a degree in mathematics
with the view being that perhaps I could go teach
math at a junior or community college if I could not
get a job as an engineer. So I had completed all but
just, I think, two courses for that math degree.
And so when I left Dayton, Wright-Patterson, the
Air Technical Intelligence Service, and came
back to Ohio State, let's see, I guess I was
enrolled in graduate school for one semester and
then I transferred back to undergraduate school
for a summer semester and completed the
requirements for that math degree and got that in
August of I can't remember, 54, I guess, something
like that. And then transferred back to graduate
school, completed my master's degree in 56, and
intended at that point to leave and go back to the
Air Technical Intelligence Center. And my senior
professor asked me about staying on for a PhD
program Well, of course, I was married by that
point. By that time, I had a family and could do
nothing more than take one course at a time.
But he offered me a teaching position, too. So I was
working at the wind tunnel lab and teaching and
going to school.
I remember one exchange that I had with him that was
rather interesting. I told him that I didn't think
I really wanted to do a PhD because it would take me
five years, even starting from the master's
level, packing it one course at a time. And I was 30
at that time. And I said, shoot.
Von, his name was Von Eschen, and everybody called
him Von. And I said, shoot, Von, in five years, I'll
be 35 years old. And he said, how old will you be in
five years if you don't do the PhD? Which was, I
guess, a pretty good line, and he had a good point.
So ultimately, I went ahead, and over an extended
period of time, I finally completed the doggone
thing. Actually, of course, it took me longer than
five years, but I had a few health problems in the
middle of the thing and had to lay out for a year and
so forth. During the time that I was at Ohio State,
of course, the space program, the space era burst
upon us in 56 with the Soviets launching of the
Sputnik.
There was of course great concern about the
so-called missile gap that President Kennedy
made so much of in the 1960 election, and which in
fact did not exist.
But there was great interest in trying to get the
U.S. into the space program, and a lot of a lot of the
work that we did there at Ohio State in the
laboratory dealt with very high-speed flight,
so-called hypersonic flight. And so we were
pretty much on the forefront of at least part of
that effort up there. And so it was a fascinating
and stimulating time. As far as the aerospace
engineering profession.
One of the sub-elements of aerospace engineering
is aerodynamics, fluid flow. There are three
other major elements, structures, and
propulsion, and flight mechanics. Well, in very
high speed flight,
the temperatures that one encounters are so great
that it causes chemical reactions in the air. In
other words, air, which is normally, if you're
flying at 200 or 300, 400 miles an hour, is just
plain old N2 and O2, principally. When you get to
talking about 8,000, 10,000 miles an hour, like
would be the case in a reentry process, then the
nitrogen and oxygen both dissociate, and the air
becomes a very complex mixture at that time. And so
most of our work, up there involved this sort of new
regime of aerodynamics where you had to include
chemically reacting flows or you had to include
chemical reactions in the calculations in order
to predict the aerodynamic characteristics of
these vehicles. That was one of the reasons why
some of our early Mercury flights and Gemini
flights missed the target, missed the landing
area to some extent because we we could not
accurately predict the lift and drag
characteristics of those reentry vehicles,
largely because of our lack of understanding
about the chemical reactions that were occurring
around the vehicle. So as I say, it was a very
exciting time to be there and to watch the
frontiers of aerospace engineering sort of be
pushed out to encompass the space age. Very
exciting time. Well, that pretty much reviews the
years then at Ohio State, and as I say, when 64
rolled around, I left and came to Texas, and except
for a couple of years when I went up to Washington,
we've been here ever since. Okay, when you came to
Texas A&M in 1964, in what position did you come? I
came as an associate professor of aerospace
engineering. And you held that until 79? No.
I became full professor two years later in 66, and
then went up to, in 1969, I left Texas A&M. and went
to the University of Maryland to become head of the
Aerospace Engineering Department at the
University of Maryland right outside of
Washington.
I and my family were not happy in Washington. I
guess this goes back to our Midwestern
conservative heritage. We enjoyed the
University of Maryland very much. Which city is
that in, the University of Maryland? Well, it's in
College Park, which is just 20 minutes from the
Capitol building. It's just right outside the
District of Columbia. And as I say, we enjoyed the
university very much, but we did not enjoy
Washington at all. Just the attitudes and the, of
course, that was a very turbulent time, tail end of
the 60s, with all of the campus unrest and so forth.
So, we were up there about two years.
My wife, bless her heart, is one of these
uncomplaining women. She just never complains.
Is she also from Ohio? Yeah. Well, she was born and
raised in LA, but she moved to Ohio when she was
young.
Our kids were like, the two girls were like 15 and
14, and the boy was like 10 or 12, something like
that. And they're pretty much like her. You know,
they just don't complain. But, you know, if your
sensors are out, you can tell that things are just
not right. And I had begun to pick up a few of these
things. And I began to ask myself if, in fact, I had
made a mistake in coming up there. And so one
Christmas vacation, my two girls, they were then,
I guess, 16 and 15. They had a friend who lived
across the street. And that's what she was a year
older and was thinking about starting the
university. That's what triggered this whole
sequence. And so this one Christmas vacation, my
two daughters came to me and said, got a
proposition for you, Dad. Fire. And they said, we
know about the high cost of college education,
especially if you have to pay out-of-state fees,
but do you suppose when our time comes, you could
see your way clear to send us to school back in
Texas? And I wasn't really surprised at what they
were telling me, but I was surprised that they were
telling me, laying it out so openly, indicating
some dissatisfaction with that area up there. And
I said, do you mean you'd go to school far away and
with a bunch of strangers? And Chris, Christine,
the oldest then, and she was just 16 at that point.
And I can see her like it was yesterday. She looked
at me. She said, Dad, she said, you know as well as I
do, these people up here don't think like we do,
which I thought was pretty damn perceptive
because she was exactly on target. They did not
think like we did. The pretentiousness, the
imagery, which is peculiar to Washington, was
just foreign to us. That filter's added to the
Maryland and Virginia suburbs, too. Yes, very
much. We lived up in Silver Spring, Maryland, one
of the Maryland suburbs up in Montgomery County,
but it permeates the area.
So that was really the thing then that tipped the
scales. And so as a matter of fact, when classes
resumed and I went back into the University of
Maryland right after Christmas, I walked into the
dean's office and told him that I had to conclude
regrettably that I had made a mistake in bringing
my family up there.
I started looking then for another job. And of
course, this was at a time when the space program
was on the way down, and the military aerospace was
on the way down. It was not a good time for aerospace
engineers. But there was a job at Cincinnati,
University of Cincinnati, and one at Iowa State
University, jobs that were open. And one at
Wichita, I guess. But I was tracking these other
jobs. And of course, aerospace enrollments were
down. And I knew there was nothing in the aerospace
engineering department here at Texas A&M for me.
But
I told my wife one night, I said, you know, I'm going
to write Fred Benson. He was the dean here for many,
many years. And just see if there would be any sort
of a position open for me there. And so I wrote him. I
told him that I had just flat made a mistake in
coming to Maryland, University of Maryland, and
that I was looking around for another job. And so he
called me right away, and he said, you forget about
going anyplace else. You're going to come back to
Texas A&M. And so that eventually was what
happened. And of course, it was a great break for
me, because it It gave me a chance to move my family
back to an area where they had friends and where we
knew the school system. And of course, it was great
to come back to A&M because, as I say, I had been
attracted here seven years earlier. And I felt
that I sort of fit in with Texas A&M. My views are, I
think, congruent, shall we say, with the general
mood and atmosphere here at A&M. And so I came back
as a special assistant to the dean. And
incidentally, you ought to do an oral history with
Fred Benson sometime, who was dean here from 1958
through, what, 1980 or so. And he's a hell of a guy.
And a lot of people don't understand him very well.
But in any event, when I came here, he made me his
special assistant for advanced research
efforts. And his only charge was, I think the
College of Engineering and TEES, the Engineering
Experiment Station, needs to do some new things.
And he reeled off an incredible set of ideas, some
of which were very far out, of things that we might
pursue. And so we did some of those and had some
successes and had some failures. And then about
three years later, his associate dean resigned.
And so he asked me to be his associate dean, which I
was then, up until up until he retired, and then I
became, I was acting dean until Dr. Page came
aboard in 79,
which was the time at which the center was set up,
and then I left the dean's office and became
director of the center, and of course I still,
throughout most of this period, I taught in
aerospace engineering, and so I still. You came
back from Maryland to here in what year, 71? 71,
right, yeah. All right, this center was
established in 1979 in this location on Highway 21
West. No, it was originally in town. And when was it
established? Where was it? Originally. Well,
this sort of gets into why the center was
established. I suppose we might as well address
that. But let me give you a short answer to the
question and then come back and fill in, if I may.
The center was established to do technology
policy work primarily at the national level. The
idea here was that when we say strategic
technology or strategic research, what we're
talking about is sort of long range stuff. And the
ideas for the Center, the idea for the Center,
incidentally, well, they started out with a set of
ideas that I had, which I'll tell you about
shortly. But then when I gave them to my boss, Fred
Benson, why, he, of course, inserted his own
ideas. So it was sort of an amalgam of the two of us,
by and large. And his view, in addition to wanting
to do national and international research, was
also to do state-level research. He felt the state
of Texas was too much crisis-oriented. That is,
the state would wait until some problem became
enormous, you know, attained crisis
proportions, and then they would address it. And
so they'd move from crisis to crisis. And his view
was that we needed to try to identify these
problems when they were still on the horizon. And
as they came closer to us, and of course some of them
would drop off and some of them would continue to
increase in enormity, that we would have
solutions that were born of some perspective. not
a solution that was just sort of patched up
overnight in response to a crisis. That's pretty
sound thinking, I think. Well, in any event, so
because of his influence, why there was this state
charter added to the national charter that the
center had. Well, at that time, the Industrial
Economics Research Division, which had been in
existence for a long, long time, The director had
resigned, and it had an acting director, and of
course they had done an awful lot of state work
doing industrial development kinds of things
around over the state. So they had a lot of people
who knew the state extensively. And so that seemed
to be a kind of a natural horse to ride into the state
policy arena. Well, they had been set up because of
the space crunch on campus. They had been set up in
offices at Bryan Place, which is at the corner of
Inwood and Texas Avenue there. And so when the
center was established, I, as the center, went
over and became the director of the center, and the
industrial economics division was then made the
industrial economics group within the center,
you see. And so it was sort of that group that we were
sort of wrapped around. And they were to become our
state policy group. And then after I got over
there, why, then we added people to fill out a
defense group, so to speak, and went on from there.
So our first location was there at Bryan Place in
rented space. And then in January of this year,
this building, which out here at the Research and
Extension Center, which has been a bit of a
controversial building. I guess we don't
necessarily need to get into that. But the
building was built without a lot of thought being
given to who would occupy it. And as a result, it was
largely unoccupied. The TTI people had moved into
part of it, but this whole wing over here was
vacant. And so, we were ordered to move out here,
and so we've been out here since January. We will
have space built for us in the new building, the new
engineering building on campus that's being
built now. And we will move back in there in about 18
months, or whenever that building is finished.
The reason for that move is that there is a vault
there for us, and we do classified work. And so we
will
have that facility there in the new building,
which of course will enhance our research
capabilities quite a lot. So that's pretty much
the status of the center now. What will happen to
this building when you move back on campus? I don't
really know. I presume that other university
elements will occupy it. And there's a general
mood now, I think, to try to make more use of this
research and extension center out here. And it's a
beautiful place to work, depending on what your
operations are. because I had set up two
laboratories out here when I was in the Aero
Department back in the 60s.
Its primary limitations are, first of all, it's,
of course, a long distance to the library. And we
make an awful lot of use of our library here, and
that is on the campus. And so it's difficult there.
The other thing that is a bit of a problem, the
center, Although it is based in engineering, it's
part of the engineering experiment station, it
really is university-wide operation. That is to
say, we have people from business
administration, from history department.
Well, our view is that we have almost 2,000
potential staff members, which means that any
faculty member from agriculture to vet medicine
is fair game for us. And so we will put together
interdisciplinary teams. Too many faculty,
especially those in business and liberal arts,
being 12 miles from the campus is like being in
Siberia. And so one encounters difficulty in
getting faculty to come out here, and students,
too, for that matter. And so those are the two
principal limitations of the location out here.
Of course, it has advantages. As you notice, we
have no parking problem, and there's no traffic
problem. That part of it is good, and it's nice and
quiet. But
we do need to be closer to the library, and we do need
to be closer to our staff members who are the
faculty and graduate students of the university.
What was originally here before this building was
built? Oh, this was just an open field here. You
said this was a former air base? Oh, yes. Yeah, it's
a very famous old air base. Yes, Bryan Air Force
Base. Yes. I'm not sure that I can tell you the full
history of it. Of course, it was active when I was in
the Air Force, in the Army Air Force then up at Waco.
And it was the Central Instructor School. I'm
sorry, that's wrong, Central Instrument School.
Back during War II, the U.S. was divided into three
flying training commands. And this was, of
course, this area of the U.S. was the central
flying training command. And instrument flying,
that is learning blind flying, as you might call
it, learning to fly strictly by instruments alone
when you can't, you know, when you're in a cloud and
you can't see out of the airplane, you can't see the
ground, you can't see anything. Instrument
flying, of course, had been developed in a
rudimentary fashion in the mid-'30s, or by the
mid-'30s, I should say. And of course, it was
essential that Air Force pilots know how to fly on
instruments. And so in each one of the flying
training commands, there was a central, that is,
there was an instrument school. And all the pilots
learned how to fly on instruments through that
school. Bryan Air Force Base here was that school
for the Central Flying Training Command. And so
you'll find an awful lot of old-time Air Force
pilots who remember when this was an active Air
Force base back during World War II. And then I
believe it was closed briefly right after World
War II and then reopened. And when it was reopened,
this one must have been in the late 40s or early 50s,
perhaps at the time of the Korean thing. Then they
came in and built two new runways, 7,700 foot
runways, parallel runways out on the Air Force
base here to handle jet aircraft. And they came in
and built these new dormitories or relatively new
dorms over here and reactivated the base. And
of course at that time they built an auxiliary
field up at Hearn. I don't know whether you've ever
seen what we affectionately refer to as Hearn
International Airport. But it is, again, I think
about a 6,000 or 7,000 foot runway, a beautiful
runway, far more than what the city of Hearn would
have built to meet its airport needs. But that was
an auxiliary field for this Air Force base here.
And the students would go up there and practice
landings and takeoffs and that sort of thing. And
then in 1958,
No, that's wrong. In 1962, I
guess maybe the Air Force base was closed in 58. I'm
not really sure. There are natives around here
that can give you more detail on this than I can. But
about 1962, there was an agreement between the
federal government and Texas A&M that A&M would
buy this place over the next 20 years. And it's a
rather interesting arrangement, When Texas A&M
gives them, each year they would make an
installment payment, the General Services
Administration, the federal government, would
deed 1 20th of the land to Texas A&M. Well, in 1982,
next year, we will make our final payment, and the
old Air Force Base then will be totally Texas A&M's
property.
So when I came down here in 64,
there were a few operations
out here. Of course, TTI had had their, you know,
had started their transportation research work
with automobiles, and the ramp and the runways
were ideal for that. But the runways had been
fenced off, and the veterinary medicine people
had horses out there.
Well, you have to understand that when aviation
has been as much of your life as it has been of mine,
that there's nothing sadder than, there's only
one thing sadder than to see an abandoned airport,
and that's to see an abandoned airplane. And so we,
when I, of course, I was brought down here to start a
research program in the Department of Aerospace
Engineering because they did not have one. And
that was one of the things that I had been pretty
good at at Ohio State, was going out and raising
money from the outside for research programs. And
so when I came down here and wanted to set up a
high-speed aerodynamics program similar to what
we'd had up at Ohio State, why, the question was,
well, where are you going to house that? And so
there was a building given to me out here to house
that facility. And then we eventually also
reopened one of the hangars over here and set up a
flight mechanics laboratory to do actual flight
test work to make use of the runways and the
facilities out here. And so it was an old Air Force
base, and of course you can still see a lot of the
trappings of that. The hangars, many of the
hangars, a couple of the hangars over there were
built as temporary hangars back in, I don't know
when, 1940, 42, I guess, at the start of World War
II. And they're, well they've deteriorated a
little bit, but not a great deal. They're still in
pretty good shape.
course having been around Air Force bases during
that period of time I can see a lot of similarity
between the way this place looks now and what the
Air Force bases looked like back in those days.
Okay could you tell me something about your
specific duties today as director about how many
people do you supervise how many employees in the
strategic technology section? Well
It's rather difficult to pin down because we're in
the process of changing our organizational
structure. Six to eight months ago, we had about 40
people in the center, and now industrial
economics has been split off again, and it's no
longer part of the center. There is an education
group. an outfit from the College of Education
that has been a part of the center now for about a
year, but its activities will terminate in the
center in September, and so they will split off. So
taking account of these things that have happened
and will happen in the next few weeks, we'll end up
with about, well, including faculty who are
involved with us on a part-time basis, about 20 uh
20 people all right could we pause here just a
moment